`7.1 Overview of Ethernet Protocols`
- An Ethernet network is a broadcast network built on the Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) mechanism
- **Early Ethernet**
	- Devices worked at the physical layer.
	- Could not confine collisions to a particular scope. This restricts network performance improvement
- **Switch Networking**
	- Devices work at the data link layer
	- Able to confine collisions to a particular scope
	- Do not restrict broadcast traffic on the Ethernet. Affects Ethernet performance
### Collision Domain
- Is a set of nodes connected to the same shared medium.
*Early Ethernet One Broadcast Domain*
- All nodes in domain compete for the same bandwidth, causing collision. More nodes on medium = more chance of collision
- Packets(unicast, multicast, broadcast) sent by a node can be received by other nodes
*Switch Networking One Broadcast Domain*
- A switch forward broadcast packets to all interfaces
- Nodes connected to all interfaces belong to the same broadcast domain
* * *
- An all-1 MAC address(FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF) is a broadcast address. 
- All nodes process data frames with the destination address being a broadcast address.
- A  *Media Access Contro*l(MAC) address uniquely identifies a *Network Interface Card*(NIC). Each network adapter requires a unique MAC address
- An NIC connects a network device(eg computer, switch) to an external network. ie. Data is forwarded through the NIC

`7.2 Overview of Ethernet Frames`
Ethernet frames are in 2 formats
1. **Ethernet_II**
	- *DMAC* - Destination MAC address. 6 bytes
	- *SMAC* - Source MAC address. 6 bytes
	- *Type* - Protocol type. 2 bytes
		- 0x0800 - IPv4
		- 0x0806 - Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)
	- *User data* - 46-1500 bytes
	- *FCS* - 4 bytes
2. **IEEE 802.3**
	- *DMAC* - Destination MAC address. 6 bytes
	- *SMAC* - Source MAC address. 6 bytes
	- *Length* - 2 bytes
	- *Logical Link Control(LLC)* - 3 bytes
		- DSAP - Destination service access point. Set to 0x06 if type is IP. 1 byte
		- SSAP - Source service access point. Set to 0x06 if type is IP. 1 byte
		- Ctrl - Usually set to 0x03. 1 byte
	- *Subnetwork Access Protocol(SNAP)* - 5 bytes
		- Org Code - 3 bytes. All 0s
		- Type - Protocol type. 2 bytes
	- *User data* - 38 - 1429 bytes
	- *FCS* - 4 bytes
`Total length of a data frame: 64 - 1518 bytes`
- Use of the minimum frame length can prevent collisions
- Use of a large frame length improves data transmission efficiency, but increases time of transmission
## IP vs MAC Addresses
**IP Addresses*
- Are unique
- Are changable
- Are assigned based on network topology
**MAC Address**
- Are unique
- Cannot be changed
- Are assigned based on manufacturer
### Need for IPs and MACs
- Route selection cannot be based on MAC since it differ according to manufacturer, hence need for IP
- When 2-layer addressing is used, devices are more flexible and easy to maintain
- Data on different network segments can be accessed using IP addresses
- Data on a single network segment can be accessed using MAC addressess.
## MAC Address Presentation
- A MAC addressis 48 bits(6 bytes) long
- 12 digit hexadecimal number, six groups of 2
## Address Composition and Classification
- Made of 2 parts
	- Organizationally Unique Identifier(OUI) - 24 bit number. Assigned by IEEE
	- Company ID(CID) - 24 bit number. Assigned by manufacturer
- Classification
	- **Unicast MAC Address** - XXXXXXX0 eg 00-1E-10-DD-DD-02
		- Identifies a terminal on an Ethernet network
		- Identifies a single node on a link
		- Can be used as either source or destination address
	- **Multicast MAC Address** - XXXXXXX1 eg 01-80-C2-00-00-01
		- Identifies a group of terminals on a LAN
		- Identifies a group of nodes on a link
		- Can only be used as the destination address
	- **Broadcast MAC Address** - FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF
		- Indicates all terminals on a LAN
`7.3 Overview of Ethernet Switches`
### Typical Architecture of a Campus Network
- Typically consists of (from lowest to highest)
	- **Access Layer**
	- **Aggregation Layer**
	- **Core Layer
	- **Egress Layer**
- ***Layer 2 Ethernet Switch***
	- Device closest to end users
	- Is used to connect terminals to a campus network
	- Forwards data packets based on MAC addresses
## Frame Processing Behaviours on a Switch
### 1. Forwarding
- Forward frames received from an interface to another interface
-  Basic function of a switch
-  If a unicast frame enters the switch interface, switch searches the MAC address table for destination MAC address of the frame.
-  If DMAC is found, switch checks whether the interface number corresponding to the destination MAC address is the interface through which the fame entered the switch
-  If not, switch forwards the frame to interface corresponding to destination MAC address. Frame is then sent out from this interface
### 2. Flooding
- Forwards frames received from an interface to all other interfaces
- If a unicast frame enters the switch interface, but  destination MAC address of the frame cannot be found in MAC address table, switch floods the unicast frame
- If a broadcast frame enters the switch interface, switch directly floods the frame without searching the MAC address table
### 3. Discarding
- Discards the frame received from an interface
-  If a unicast frame enters the switch interface, switch searches the MAC address table for destination MAC address of the frame.
-  If DMAC is found, switch checks whether the interface number corresponding to the destination MAC address is the interface through which the fame entered the switch
-  If yes, switch discards the frame