`8.1 What is VLAN`
- Virtual Loca Area network
- Can logically divide a large broadcast domain into several small domains.
- Improves network security, lowers junk traffic, reduces the number of required network resources
    **Characteristics**
- Each VLAN is a broadcast domain.
- PCs in the same VLAN can directly communicate at Layer 2.
- PCs in different VLANs can only communicate at Layer 3. This confines broadcast packets to each VLAN
- VLAN assignment is geographially independent
    **Advantages**
- Simplifies network construction and maintenance. Terminals in different geographical locations can be grouped together
- Confines each broadcast domain to a single VLAN, conserving bandwidth and improving network processing capabilities
- Enhances LAN security. PCs in different VLANs cannot communicate directly, since frames are separately transmitted
- Improves network robustness. Faults in one VLAN do not affect the other

* * *

`8.2 VLAN Principles*`
VLAN identification, VLAN assignment, and VLAN frame processing on switches.

## VLAN Tag

- **IEEE 802.1Q** (a.k.a Dot1q) defines a 4-byte VLAN tag for Ethernet frames, enabling switches to identify the VLANs to which received frames belong.
- Tag is inserted between the SMAC and the Length/Type field of an Ethernet frame
- Tag consists of
    - **Tag Protocol Identifier(TPID)** \- Identifies the type of a frame. The value 0x8100 indicates IEEE 802.1Q frame. 16 bits
    - **PRI** \- Identifies the priority of a frame, mainly used for Qos. Ranges from 0-7. Larger value indicates higher priority. 3 bits
    - **Canonical Format Indicator(CFI)** \- Indicates whether a MAC address is in the canonical format. Value is 0 for Ethernet frames. 1 bit
    - **VLAN ID** \- Identifies the VLAN to which a frame belongs. Ranges from 0 - 4095, with 0 and 4095 being reserved. 12 bits

```
-> PCs cannot identify tagged frames and can only send/process untagged frames.
-> All frames processed by switches are tagged
```

### VLAN Assignment Methods

- **Interface-based assignment**
    - Assigns VLANs based on the switch interfaces
    - A network administrator preconfigures a Port VLAN ID(PVID) for each switch interface.
    - When an untagged frame arrives at an interface of a switch, the switch adds a tag carrying the PVID of the interface to the frame. Default PVID is 1
    - Frame is then transmitted to the specified VLAN
- **MAC address-based assignment**
    - Assigns VLAN based on the source MAC address of frames
    - A network admin preconfigures the mapping between MAC addresses and VLAN IDs.
    - When an untagged frame is received, the switch adds the VLAN tag mapping the SMAC of the frame to the received frame
    - Frame is transmitted to specified VLAN
- **IP subnet-based assignment**
    - Assigns VLANs based on the source IP address and subnet mask of the frame
    - A network admin preconfigures the mapping b/n IP addresses and VLAN IDs.
    - When an untagged frame is received, the switch adds the VLAN tag mapping the source IP address of the frame to the received frame.
    - Frame is transmitted to specified VLAN
- **Protocol-based assignment**
    - Assigns VLAN based on the protocol type and encapsulation formates of frames
    - A network admin preconfigures the mapping between protocol (suite) types and VLAN IDs.
    - When an untagged frame is received, the switch add the VLAN tag mapping the protocol type of the frame to the received frame
    - Frame is transmitted to specified VLAN
- **Policy-based assignment**
    - Assigns VLANs based on a specified policy, such as a combination of the methods above

## <ins>Layer 2 Ethernet Interface Types</ins>

### 1\. Access Interface

- Used to connect a switch to a terminal that cannot identify VLAN tags(PCs, servers)
- Can only be added to one VLAN
- Permits only frames whose VLAN ID is the same as the PVID of the interface

**Frame Receiving**

1.  ***Untagged Frames***
    - Access Interface adds a tag with the VID being the PVID of the interface
    - Floods, forwards or discards the tagged frame
2.  ***Tagged Frames***
    - Checks whether VID in the tag is the same as PVID.
    - If same, forwards the tagged frame
    - If not, discards the frame

**Frame Sending**

- After receiving a tagged frame sent from another interface on the same switch, checks whether VID in tag is same as the PVID
- If same, removes the tag from the frame and sends the untagged frame out
- Discards the frame if otherwise

* * *

### 2\. Trunk Interface

- Connects a switch to another switch, router, firewall or voice terminal that can receive and send both tagged and untagged frames
- Allows frames belonging to multiple VLANs to pass through
- Allows tagged frames from multiple VLANs to pass through
- Allows untagged frames from only one VLAN to pass through
- Network admin needs to configure PVID and list of VLAN IDs permitted by the interface. VLAN 1 is in list by default.

**Frame Receiving**

1.  ***Untagged Frames***
    - Trunk interface adds a tag with the VID being the PVID of the interface
    - Checks if VID is in list of permitted VLAN IDs
    - If in list, forwards the tagged frame. Discards if otherwise
2.  ***Untagged Frames***
    - Checks whether VID in tag is in the list of permitted VLAN IDs
    - If in list, forwards the tagged frame. Discards if otherwise

**Frame Sending**

- After receiving a tagged frame sent from another interface on the same switch, checks whether VID in tag is on the list of permitted VLAN IDs
- If not, discards the frame
- If in list, checks whether VID of tag is the same as PVID of the interface
    - If same, removes the tag and sends the untagged frame out
    - If different, directly sends out frame without removing tag

* * *

### 3\. Hybrid Interface

- Connects to
    - A user terminal(PC or server) that cannot identify VLANs tags
    - A switch, router, or AP that can send and receive tagged and untagged frames
- Network admin needs to configure PVID, list of *untagged* VLAN IDs permitted and list of *tagged* VLAN IDs permitted
- Frames sent out can be either tagged or untagged
- Allows untagged frames from multiple VLANs to pass through, unlike Trunk.

**Frame Receiving**

1.  ***Untagged Frames***
    - Hybrid interface adds a tag with the VID being the PVID of the interface
    - Checks if VID is in tagged or untagged list of permitted VLAN IDs
    - If in either list, forwards the tagged frame. Discards if otherwise
2.  ***Tagged Frames***
    - Checks whether VID is in tagged or untagged VLAN id list
    - If in either, forwards the tagged frame. Discards the fame if otherwise

**Frame Sending**

- After receiving a tagged frame sent from another interface on the same switch, checks whether VID in tag is in the either list of permitted VLAN IDs
- If in neither, discards the frame
- If in untagged list, removes the tag and forwards the untagged frame
- If in tagged list, sends out the frame without removing the tag

* * *

## Summary of Steps

### Frame Receiving

1.  **Untagged Frame**
    1.  Add VLAN tag
    2.  In Access, forward frame directly
    3.  In Trunk and Hybrid, check if VID is in list of permitted VLAN IDs
2.  **Tagged Frame**
    1.  In access, forward frame only if VID is the same as PVID
    2.  In Trunk and Hybrid, forward frame only if VID is in list of permitted IDs

### Frame Sending

1.  *Access* \- Remove VLAN tag and send
2.  *Trunk*
    - Check if VID is in list of permitted VLAN IDs. If not, discard.
    - Remove VLAN tag only if VID is same as PVID
3.  *Hybrid*
    - Check if VLAN ID is in tagged or untagged list. If in neither, discard.
    - If in untagged, remove tag and forward
    - If in tagged, send without removing tag