# 1.1 OSPF Features and Characteristics
## Intro to OSPF
**OSPFv2** is used for IPv4 networks. **OSPFv3** is used for IPv6 networks.
- Is a *link-state* routing protocol
- Offers faster convergence and scales better to larger networks. **Convergence** is the rate at which information is being collected and shared
- Uses the concept of **areas** , with routing domains being divided into distinct areas
- A *link*  is 
	- an interface on a router
	- a network segment connecting two routers
	- a stub network connected to a single router
- *Link-state*  is the information about the state of a link. Includes
	- *Network prefix*
	- *Prefix length*
	- *Cost*

## Components of OSPF
All routing protocols have 3 main parts
1. **Routing Protocol Messages** - Used to exchange route info
2. **Data Structures** - Built using the messages exchanged
3. **Routing Algorithm** - Used to process the data structures

OSPF uses *5*  types of packets to discover neighbour routers and exchange routing info
1. Hello
2. Database description
3. Link-state request
4. Link-state update
5. Link-state acknowledgement

> ACK packets are always exchanged before information exchange begins

OSPF messages are used to create and maintain *3*  OSPF databases

| Database                 | Table          | Description                                                                                                          |
| ------------------------ | -------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Adjacency Database       | Neighbor Table | - Lists all neighbor routers with bi-directional comms. Unique for each router. `ip ospf neghbor`                    |
| Link-State Databse(LSDB) | Topology Table | - Lists info about all other routers in network. All routers in an area have identical LSDB. `show ip ospf database` |
| Forwarding Database      | Routing Table  | - Lists routes generated when an algorithm is run on the LSDB. Unique for each router. `show ip route`               |
> Tables are stored in the RAM.
> LSDB represents the network topology
> Topology table is built using Dijkstra's SPF algorithm
## Link-State Operation
1. **Establish Neighbour Adjacencies** - Send hello packets on all OSPF-enabled interfaces to determine if neighbours are present
2. **Exchange Link-State Advertisements** - LSAs contain the state and cost of each directly connected link. LSAs are flooded to adjacent neighbours till all routers have all LSAs
3. **Build link state database** - LSAs are used to build the topology table
4. **Execute the SPF algo** - SPF is used to create the SPF tree containing all routes to a network
5. **Choose the best route** - The best route from SPF tree is added to the routing table

## Single-Area and Multiarea OSPF
- OSPF supports hierarchical routing using areas.
- An **OSPF area** is a group of routers that share the same link-state info in their LSDB
> Networks are usually connected to the ISP through area 0

**Single-Area OSPF** - All routers in one area (usually area 0)
**Multiarea OSPF** - Multiple areas in hierarchical style. All areas **must** connect to area 0 (aka *backbone area*). Routers connecting different areas are called *Area Border Routers (ABRs)*. Advantages are:
1. Smaller routing table
2. Reduces link-state update overhead
3. Reduces frequency of SPF calculations

## OSPFv3
- Similar to OSPFv2, but uses IPv6 as the network layer transport.
- Exchanges routing info to populate the IPv6 routing table with remote prefixes.
```
Network address > Prefix
Subnet mask > Prefix-length
```
# 1.2 OSPF Packets
## Types of OSPF Packets
1. **Hello** - Used to discover neighbours and maintain neighbour adjacencies.Elects the DR and BDR
2. **Database description (DBD)** - Checks for database synchronization. Basically a summarized LSDB
3. **Link-State Request** - Request specific link-state records from router to router
4. **Link-State Update** - Send specifically requested link-state records. Can contain one or more of11 types of OSPFv2 LSAs
5. **Link-state Acknowledgement** - Acknowledges other packet types (except hello and acks). Hass an empty data field

> Insert image of OSPF hello packet content here

`Point to point links do not require DR or BDR`

## OSPF Operation
| State | Description|
|---|---|
|Down | No hello packets received. Transitions to Init after sending Hello packets |
| Init | Hello packet received from neighbour. Contains Router ID of sending router. Move to Two-Way State |
|Two-Way | Bidirectional comms b/n the 2 routers. DR and BDR election (for multiaccess links).|
| ExStart | On P2P networks, routers decide which router will initiate DBD packet exchange and decide initial DBD packet sequence number |
| Exchange| Routers exchange DBD packets.Transition to Loading state if additional info is needed, otherwise Full state
| Loading | LSRs and LSUs are used to gain additional route info. Routes are processed using SPF. Transition to Full
| Full | LSDB of router is fully synchronized|
When a router receives a Hello packet with its Router ID listed in the list of neighbors, the router transitions from the Init state to the Two-Way state.

> Reserved All OSPF Routers IPv4 multicast address - 224.0.0.5

## Synchronizing OSPF Databases
- Happens after the Two-Way state
- Is a 3-step process
	1. **Decide first router** - In ExStart, router with the higher router ID will send DBDs first during Exchange
	2. **Exchange DBDs** - 
	3. **Send an LSR**

 **OSPF elections** of a DR are based on the following in order of precedence:
- highest pritority from 1 -255 (0 = never a DR)
- highest router ID
- highest IP address of a loopback or active interface in the absence of a manually configured router ID. Loopback IP addresses take higher precedence than other interfaces.