**Module Objective**: Troubleshoot enterprise networks.

|**Topic Title**|**Topic Objective**|
|---|---|
|**Network Documentation**|Explain how network documentation is developed and used to troubleshoot network issues.|
|**Troubleshooting Process**|Compare troubleshooting methods that use a systematic, layered approach.|
|**Troubleshooting Tools**|Describe different networking troubleshooting tools.|
|**Symptoms and Causes of Network Problems**|Determine the symptoms and causes of network problems using a layered model.|
|**Troubleshooting IP Connectivity**|Troubleshoot a network using the layered model|
# Network Documentation
## Documentation overview
Network documentation includes 
1. Physical and logical network topology diagrams
2. Network device documentation
3. Network performance baseline documentation

## Network Topology Diagrams
- Keeps track of the *location*, *function*, and *status* of devices
- Can be divided into 2 types
	- **Physical**: Shows the physical layout of the devices on the network. Helpful when troubleshooting physical layer problems. Includes info such as 
		- Device name
		- Device location
		- Interface and ports used
		- Cable type
	- **Logical**: Shows how devices are connected logically on the network (ie. how devices transfer data when communicating). Includes info such as
		- Device identifiers
		- IP addresses and prefix lengths
		- Interface identifiers
		- Routing protocols and static routes
		- Layer 2 info (VLANs, trunks, EtherChannels)

## Network Device Documentation
- Keeps records of the hardware and software used
- Some info is common in both router and LAN switch device documentations
	1. Device name
	2. Model
	3. Description
	4. IOS / OS

**Router Device Documentation**
Info stored about the routers should include
1. Location
2. License
3. Interface info (addresses, routing info, desc, etc)

**LAN Switch Device Documentation**
Should include
1. Management IP address
2. VTP
3. Port info ( VLANs, Trunk, EtherChannel, port status-enable/shutdown)

**End-system Documentation**
Focuses on the hardware and software used in *servers*, *management consoles* and *user workstations*
Should include
1. Services being run
2. IP addresses
3. DNS
4. Default gateway

## Establish a Network Baseline
- Helps to determine when there is abnormal behaviour in the network. Can also help reveal problems such as potential congestion points and underutilised parts of the network
**Steps**
1. Determine what types of data to collect - According to company defined policies. Commonly collected data are *interface utilisation* and *CPU utilisation*.
2. Identify devices and ports of interest- Ports on edge devices, servers, key users, etc.
3. Determine the baseline duration - Should be **7 days** at min. Typically should not last more than **6 weeks**. Should not be performed at unique times like peak hours, but during normal operation

## Data Measurement