**Module Objective**: Explain the purpose and characteristics of network virtualization.

| **Topic Title**                    | **Topic Objective**                                          |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Cloud Computing**                | Explain the importance of cloud computing.                   |
| **Virtualization**                 | Explain the importance of virtualization.                    |
| **Virtual Network Infrastructure** | Describe the virtualization of network devices and services. |
| **Software-Defined Networking**    | Describe software-defined networking.                        |
| **Controllers**                    | Describe controllers used in network programming.            |
# Cloud Computing
**Uses**
1. Enable access to organisational data anywhere
2. Streamline IT operations by subscribing only to needed services
3. Reduces need for onsite IT equipment and maintenance
4. Reduces cost for equipment and power
5. Scalable

## Cloud Services
- **Software as a Service (SaaS)** - Cloud provider gives access to applications and services such as email, Office 365. User only provides data

- **Platform as a Service (PaaS)** - Cloud provider gives access to development tools and services. Usually given to *programmers*, who can configure the settings as needed

- **Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)** - Given to *IT managers*. Allows them to manage network equipment, virtualized network services, and other network infrastructure. Also allows them to deploy and run software, including OS and applications

- **IT Support as a Service (ITaaS)** - Not among the usual suite, but can be added on demand to support the services listed above

## Cloud Models
- **Public cloud** - Available to the general public. Free or pay-per-use.
- **Private cloud** - Intended for a specific organization/entity (eg. government). Can be setup using the organization's private network, or managed by an outside organization.
- **Community cloud** - Like public cloud, but customized for a specific community (eg, healthcare organizations)
- **Hybrid cloud** - Made of **2** or more clouds. Each part is separate, but connected with a single architecture

`Data centers are physical facilities that provide the compute, network, and storage needs of cloud computing services.`
`Cloud computing is a service that offers on-demand access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources`


# Virtualization
**Virtualization** separates the OS from the hardware. 
- Servers in the past were *dedicated servers*, with each one having a single purpose (email, web, file, DHCP...)
- 

`Virtualization is the foundation of cloud computing`

July 30 - Final Cisco Exam
July 23 - ENSA
July 19 - Module 6-8